passion harvest
hello passionate listeners and watchers
welcome to passion harvest i
am luis your host international passion
ambassador i am
really really really excited about my
guest today he's i've just read his
amazing book and if you don't know who
he is christopher
m bash professor christopher m bash set
out to explore his mind
and the mind of the universe on what
will become a life-changing journey with
the help of the psychedelic drug lsd
chris's 73 high-dose lsd sessions over
the course of 20 years
drew him into a deeper communion with
cosmic consciousness
pushing the boundaries of theory and
practice chris's psychedelic
experiences took him beyond
self-transformation
into collective transformation beyond
the prison into the future
revealing spirit and matter in perfect
balance
christopher m bash phd is a professor in
the department of philosophy and
religious studies at young town state
university
where he taught for 33 years he is also
the adjunct faculty
at the california institute of integral
studies
emeritus i hope i said that properly
fellow at the institute of noic
scientists
sciences and the advisory council of
graf
legacy training chris's passion has been
the study of
philosophical implications of
non-ordinary states of consciousness
especially psychedelic states an
award-winning teacher and
international speaker chris has written
four books
life cycles a study of reincarnation in
light of contemporary consciousness
research
dark knight early dawn a pioneering work
in psychedelic philosophy and collective
consciousness the living classroom and
exploration of collective fields of
consciousness in teaching
and lsd and the mind of the universe
the story offers of his 20-year journey
with lsd this is his story and this is
his passion
professor christopher embash welcome to
passion harvest thank you so much for
being here
my pleasure louisa it's nice to be with
you it's so nice to be with you
i've just read your book it's fabulous
i'd like to dive right
in for those that haven't read it and
the link
all the links will be in the show notes
what is the book about
and what story are you telling that's
two questions i'm sorry but
well i was trained as a philosopher
religion
and right as i was beginning my career
at young sound state university i met
the work of stanislaw of graf the
foremost authority of integrating
psychedelics into psychotherapy i read
his book realms of the human unconscious
which had just been published this is a
long time ago in 1978
and i saw that this work was
extraordinarily important i mean we're
undergoing a renaissance of psychedelic
research now but stan's work comes from
the early generation he was in the the
earliest tier of this research
so i i read his work i saw what how
important this was
not just to psychology but to philosophy
and so i
i just had to find out for myself
what using psychedelics was using lsd in
a very careful and specific way
in a very controlled circumstances using
a therapeutic protocol
you know pioneered by the early
researchers stan particularly
uh what it could teach me about myself
about my mind and ultimately the mind of
the universe
so i began a 20-year what became a
20-year journey
i chose perhaps foolishly to choose a
regimen working with very high doses of
lsd
in these control circumstances i did 73
high dose sessions systematically over
20 years
recording the results and after i had
finished in 79 i did this work when i
was 30 to 50.
after i finished the work i took another
20 years to think about and digest and
process these experiences
eventually 20 years later in 1999
publishing
lsd in the mind of the universe which is
this the complete story from beginning
to end
of where this journey took me into the
universe
i said before the interview i'm almost
jealous in a way what you experienced
but you did
experience such deep emotional and
physical suffering but such deep
profound
insight of universal truths do you mind
just explaining to the audience and you
do detail this in your book what a
session
looks like a session my sessions
always began in the early morning here
all i was always
isolated i was either in my home or in
my wife's office
i was i always had a sitter who
carefully took care of me and monitored
me
my wife my sister was my first wife
carol who was a clinical psychologist
uh i'm always lying down on a mattress
on the floor surrounded by pillows
i'm listening i have my eyes covered
with eye shades i'm listening with
earphones to very carefully selected
music to paste the unfolding of the
session
totally protected from outside outside
interferences
internally focus focus deeply within
and they last all day they last
basically
from early morning about eight hours
into the late afternoon or early evening
and i asked you before the the physical
toll on the body
what was that like aside from the the
emotional
aspects and the spiritual the the
physical yeah
well physically i mean i'm fine it it's
actually
a very beneficial process because in
this work
when the body begins i mean basically
lsd is an amplifier of consciousness it
hyper stimulates hyper amplifies
consciousness
our conventional commonplace
understanding of psychedelics is
is quite wrong we're coming into a new
era of psychedelic research the public
is being educated to a deeper
understanding of what these substances
do but they basically
hyper amplify consciousness and if you
use this amplified state carefully and
conscientiously
your body begins a detoxification
process
it begins to pull out of your system all
the things you'd rather not
face all the things you're scared of all
the things you're afraid of all the
things that basically
your shadow classically you begin
these things begin to come up at you and
if you confront them
clearly and conscientiously you
basically can begin to lift these things
out of your system
you go through eventually a death and
rebirth
process your your total
identity that you had developed over
your lifetime on earth
ultimately is shattered and you were
spun
into deeper transpersonal or spiritual
states of consciousness
if you continue this work this cycle of
purification
continues and the the the difficult
material that you have to process
comes from beyond the personal psyche it
comes from deeper levels of
consciousness the collective levels of
consciousness the species
mind archetypal levels of consciousness
and i know this is a radical story i
mean i really do i
understand how far beyond most people's
experience this is
and i i understand how off the wall it
is just
i think i think it's incredible but but
basically you go through deep deep deep
purification
processes which are well known in the
spiritual mystical traditions
you're clearing a lot of material not
only from your own body mind history but
also from the history of your species
and so on and so forth and it involves a
lot of physical
detoxification as well a lot of
purification of your body
the net result even though you go
through some very
difficult you know purification
suffering
multiple deaths and rebirths the
cumulative effect is very clarifying on
your body and on your emotions it's very
uplifting
because when you go through these
intense purifications you are spun
into very very deep positive ecstatic
states of consciousness which deepen
as the process progresses so my body's
in good shape
i i think my emotions are in good shape
it was been an
adventuresome and avengersome journey i
just wouldn't have missed it for the
world
it's incredible and you you what what's
interesting
you talk about the the death and the
rebirth you all
talk about the death and the rebirth of
the ego or the removal of the ego
and even more interesting during this
process you had to surrender but
in this process of growth and evolution
you also um
affected the collective consciousness
which is a very interesting
um way of thinking about it yeah
and surprising to me i wasn't expecting
this at all
i was thinking when i got into this work
that this was about personal healing
or personal transformation personal
enlightenment
but what i found after going through two
years of this work and going into the
second
two years of the work i started
processing
enormous vast tracts of pain i started
being drawn into fields of suffering
that really were like dante's inferno
just thousands and thousands of beings
and thousands of years of human
suffering
were just passing through me flowing
through me
and at first i thought this was a deeper
form of ego death
but this kept on for so many years and
it was so collective
that i eventually was forced to consider
an alternative
understanding which has become my
normative understanding and that is
that in these very very intense states
of consciousness
something in the universe uses these
states
of consciousness to heal the scars
certain scars that are collected
in the human collective unconscious
which history is deposited
into the human collective unconscious so
that
instead of healing my personal psyche
or even former life trauma i spent
years healing various trauma that had
gotten lodged into the collective
unconscious
and this is what i mean that personal
transformation
opens into collective transformation
now i think that all of us are always
hardwired into the collective psyche
and that all of us when we are
undergoing various spirits
you know our own personal issues we are
simultaneously
processing collective issues that are
that our healing
has an impact on the collective psyche
it's just that when you work with
psychedelics this kind of becomes
uh intensified it becomes paramount
so yeah i spent two years doing this
collective healing and then i was spun
into yet another level of consciousness
where the rules of the game
changed changed again i can't wait to
hear about that in a minute but
it's so interesting because we we always
well we think of ourselves with our
personal transformation and growth and
i want to reach this level but little do
we necessarily realize that it's
um we're working on a collective level
so that would also
mean that the collective consciousness
is affecting us what the collective
consciousness is experiencing
i mean obviously we're living in a crazy
time in the world right now but it must
we can't distance ourselves from the
impacts of that as much as
we would like to try yeah
well you know we're organically embedded
i think in the collective psyche just
like we're physically embedded in the
eco ecology of the earth you can't
separate us from the ecology that
surrounds us
psychologically we are embedded in the
collective psyche
my experience basically has spent a lot
of time exploring the
intimacy with which we are embedded in
the psyche
and the ways in which each of our
individual lives
are fractal cells within the larger life
of the species which is part of a
fractal cell within the larger life of
the universe itself in the solar system
in the galaxy
so we are implemented deeply into
implemented
in our collective process eventually i
found that there's no separation
between our personal transformation and
our
collective transformation that all of us
are players
on an historical stage all of our
individual issue i mean
picture any issue that anybody's dealing
with no matter what it is
and it has to be related to something
which is going on in the collective
we don't have a private issue that isn't
reflected
in some type of dynamic in society
they're just dealing with the same issue
and the way
we're kind of like hardwired together
and i know that that's not the usual way
of thinking about it i know that our
conventional psychology says we're all
completely standalone
computers we're all you know simply
working on our personal issues
but that's simply not my experience
that's not what shows in these deep
states of consciousness
in these deep states of consciousness
it's like we're networked
we are we have separate private
functions but we're also networked into
vast collective processes
so that we're engaging that all the time
yes it's a careful balance between being
autonomous
and all one is it your belief that we
are in fact
all one someone's described it as
uh the creator having multiple
personalities which is
the humans i i'm just wondering what's
your point of view
i think that core insight that emerges
in some of the religious traditions the
spiritual traditions that atman
is brahman the essence of the individual
is the essence of the totality
and in my experience that's
fundamentally true it's really true
you know at the core of our person
is an energy a consciousness an
awareness an awakeness
and the nature of that energy is the
nature of the divine itself
that we are sparks of the divine fire
and that all of us that you know oneness
is one of the deepest most consistent
and widespread spiritual experiences
that emerges in mystical traditions
to experience oneness is a totally
transforming experience
because out of oneness grows compassion
out of oneness grows a concern for
fairness and justice
also out of oneness grows the technology
the techniques
for deepening our immersion our
communion with oneness
so that we talk about someone being
mystically realized or spiritually
realized
it means that they have gone through a
process where they become transparent to
the fundamental oneness of life and that
they live
consciously now both as an individual
and they are
individuals and simultaneously
they have a to varying degrees a feeling
for
our receptivity to the fundamental
oneness of existence itself
the pulse of existence as a totality
yeah it's really interesting we so often
get caught up in our own personal
stories
very much so are our thoughts our own
ah they both are and they're not i mean
i think
it's a very interesting system logically
we would think it would have to be an
either or
but in fact i think uh it's a much more
complex process
the thoughts that i'm using right now to
speak to you are my own thoughts i'm
kind of reaching into my memories to to
bring them to you
but if i if we step back if if we were
to step back into deeper
more relaxed states of consciousness if
we would step into
meditative states of consciousness and
deeply quieted states of consciousness
and seek to watch where our thoughts
come from
we find that there are actually a number
of different things that influence what
arises from the depth of our awareness
and many of those things that influence
what arises
are really causes that are
outside my personal lineage causes which
are collective
causes which are spiritual causes which
are
historical causes which are cosmic
so that what arises into focus in my
individual awareness moment to moment
has a pedigree and this pedigree i think
extends
beyond the individual and if you i mean
artists experience this you know many
artists
are creative people when they write a
poem or when they create a picture
their experience is i didn't do it it
flowed through me
it came through me so some artists won't
even sign their works of art because
that would suggest that they created it
personally
but their experiences is that something
larger created through them
that blending of a deeper creativity
and the personal agency i think
characterizes
all of our lives in all circumstances
and it certainly becomes transparent
in psychedelic states of consciousness
gosh i was just well is the thought my
own but i was just thinking if we have
time i'd love you to share some of you
know the
the pivotal moments that you share in
the book but what's fascinating
is how you talk about you transcend time
and space um
future past present it's all potentially
there happening now do you mind
exploring or explaining that a little
bit more because i think it's absolutely
fascinating yeah
that was another one of the surprises
that i encountered here
now we know that physicists talk to us
about
linear time is not really the only way
that time moves that there are some
particles that move backwards in time
and when you enter into the massive
compression of black holes
time you know the physics of time
changes and in superstring
theory there are dimensions of the
universe that are not linear time like
space-time is
uh turns out that when you go into deep
deep
non-ordinary states of consciousness you
and at least i i'll just speak for
myself and i think this is echoed in
other people's experiences
you experienced if that fact has that
time has different
modalities to it there are different
ways of experiencing time
so early on in my sessions i i went
through a series
of experiences that lasted about a year
seven sessions
where when i came through this profound
purification process every time i did
i was brought into an experience of what
i call
deep time not eternity which is
non-time but deep time where i
experienced my entire life
from start to finish as a simultaneous
now
it was like all the moments of my life
were a giant tree
and my most recent experiences before
death were the leaves at the outside of
the tree
and this the experiences which had been
repeated more and more frequently were
the big giant limbs in the center of the
tree
but all i experienced myself
both with the life yet to come and also
simultaneously with my life already
having been lived
and i knew myself at that deep level
in later sessions in the years following
i entered into deep time
repeatedly but this the the texture kept
broadening i entered into deep time
beyond my personal life into the life of
the species
i began to have experiences of the
evolutionary
trajectory of humanity and again i know
this sounds egoic i know it sounds just
absolutely crazy to say but no it
doesn't it doesn't
i experience the trajectory of human
evolution
not as it in the future not as something
which is not yet and it's in the future
time
but i experienced it simultaneously as
something coming to us
but also as something that had already
been completed so there was a
wholeness and a breath in a depth of
texture
when you move into very very deep states
of consciousness for example
when you move into what classically we
would call
archetypal states of consciousness deep
into the constitutive principles which
are responsible for kind of generating
space-time as we know it
those beings or those forces the they
live
outside of linear time as we know it you
know
so linear time is how things behave
inside space-time but as you move to the
edges of space-time
time behaves differently than we
experience it
inside space and time
if you go into extreme conditions you
may transcend time
all together so that you move into
you move beyond time entirely you can
move into what
some people would call eternity or the
eternal now
are just completely outside space-time
reality altogether
deep time is different than that deep
time is a certain span of time
whether it's a hundred years or a
hundred thousand years
experienced kind of as a simultaneous
now
are experienced sometimes accelerated
i've been in experiences where centuries
were passing by in minutes
you know just an accelerated experience
of the evolution
taking place on the planet i tried on
this is what
i try to unpack this in the book try to
lay it out as carefully and i know yes
i think it's fascinating is everything
happening
now i think
perhaps from some perspectives from a
perspective you could say
that everything is happening from now
but personally
that's not a very useful perspective i
find
i i've tried to think in those terms and
i find that i literally cannot make my
mind
think coherently within that frame
because
my mind needs the structure of cause and
effect
even if those if that varies in certain
places but it needs a certain
some type of variation or permutation of
cause and effect
for me to understand life as i know it
on this planet
when i've gone into deep non-ordinary
states
time has been variable but has time
completely dissolved all together
[Music]
it's been radically eclipsed at
different moments
but it hasn't led me to be convinced
that
everything is happening happening
simultaneously now
forever and ever i think it's a more
complex
pattern than that but i don't know in
the end
i really don't know well that was a very
honest answer thank you so much you talk
about
as well that you saw the whole
trajectory of your life
yeah uh my question then is it's been a
question asked since the beginning of
time but
or what's time is everything pre-planned
no i don't think it's pre-planned
i think it is their probabilities i
think when we
incarnate for example i mean you know i
believe in reincarnation you know i've
written a book on reincarnation yes
i assumed you did yes just i think it's
an empirical
fact that we that we incarnate that we
reincarnate
and eventually you get far enough along
in that process that you don't
reincarnate haphazardly or randomly you
reincarnate by choice
you choose your incarnation carefully
and that means choosing the place
and circumstances and timing of your
incarnation
and you do that from a perspective in
which you can see
a certain trajectory of what's waiting
for you
if you choose this life versus if you
choose another life and
in that respect i think there's a
certain probability there's a certain
a certain inevitability of certain
things coming together
that constitute the challenges and
opportunities of your life
but that doesn't mean it's deterministic
it doesn't mean it's a predetermined
outcome
because if it were a predetermined
outcome then why bother
you know there would be nothing to learn
there has to be a certain
open-endedness if we're truly going to
be challenged by
that possibility of variable outcomes in
order to learn
and so i think that that while there are
probabilities
and the closer you get to certain events
those probabilities
increase the farther you are away from
those events
those probabilities decrease i think
there is
time i think there is chance operating
in the universe
but i also think that there is deep the
the you know the eastern traditions call
it
karma karma of cause and effect
cause and effect but cause and effect
does not extinguish
choice it conditions choice it qualifies
choice but it doesn't eliminate the
possibility of
of choice but you have to work
for choices to be free if you don't work
if you don't pay attention let's put it
this way
the less you pay attention the more
likely your
choices are going to be highly
conditioned but the more you pay
attention
the more you can increase the freedom in
your choosing
but to do that you have to pay a lot of
attention
great answer and i'm going to re-listen
to that
has your life played out how you saw it
during your
lsd experiences
it has now i want to be careful
it's not that i experienced that i saw
all the details of my life it's funny
how
i experienced my life as a as the sum
totality of
everything that i was everything i had
become
everything that i then was
but there were specific things in my
life that i wish i had had a little
heads up on
frankly you know that i didn't see i
didn't remember
all the details but it's a deeper
reading than that
it was like a um coming to know myself
in a way which gave me a deep
understanding of what i'm about what my
the truth of my life is about
and somewhat about why i'm here and what
my purpose is
now i think every one of us carries that
knowledge inside themselves
and it guides us at a very deep level at
an intuitive level when we come to
choice points if we're careful we tune
into that
and it does guide us this is in that
respect this is nothing unusual it's
just a
an unusually intense confrontation
with that knowing that we all carry
within us
in general yeah i uh
my life has unfolded along the lines uh
as i saw it
at that time as i experienced it i'm not
as i am
i would say the person that i met which
is now about
almost 40 years ago 35 years ago
the person that i met then is no
stranger to the person that i
am now
okay interesting but you're a very
different person than when you were
40 years ago i well i am yeah
uh yeah i've paid my dues
gone to work every day raised three
children
dealt with all the uncertainties of life
that we all have to deal with
in that process i hope i've kept my wits
about me
i hope i've been learning as i've been
going
yeah i have to ask you the question you
spoke about the evolution of the species
and you saw
you know elements of that in your
experiences do you mind sharing that
with the audience
well this is that's a big topic oh okay
yeah but i'm happy to touch on it but
okay
it's was again one of the big deep
surprises of my journey because i never
ever imagined that something like this
would become part of this journey
again i was kind of thinking in terms of
the conventional descriptions of
enlightenment that you find in the
spiritual mystical traditions or
that kind of thing but what happened was
pretty systematically over years of work
i began to be given a series of
visionary experiences and when i say
visionary
you know it's it's not like they were
just visual
that you in these states of
consciousness you
learn by becoming what it is you're
experiencing
so you become
what it is you're experiencing it you
know it from the inside so when
when i say i had a systematic initiation
into various visual
visions of what's happening with
humanity
i it's like i dilated i entered into
absorption with the species mind in a
state of deep time and
just consistently there was a consistent
message that was
poured into me about where we were
and completely surprised me because i
you know i didn't give a lot of time
thinking about humanity in this
global sense but the message was that
humanity is coming into a turning point
we're coming to a decisive time in our
history
we're coming to a bifurcation point in
our evolutionary development the time
when
the past will convert diverge
uh we're coming into a true before and
after advance a change which
a time in history that will change us at
the very fundamental core
of our existence and not simply a change
in our
economy or a change in our politics or
our cultural values
but a change in the architecture of the
collective psyche
so that all human beings born after this
period of history we'll be working
within a different archetypal structure
of collective psyche
and that this was a time of profound
spiritual awakening a
time of extraordinary
change on the face of the planet that
would be marking history would always be
marked around this before and after
event
this was over and over it was laid out
very consistently deepening it over time
and there were times when
i was given i was taken deep into the
future
and given short experiences of what i
came to call
the future human the human being that we
were becoming
in history but they didn't explain to me
how this was going to happen or what
form these things would take
until several years later when i had a
particularly deep experience which
took place in 1995
again i i did all this work between 79
and 99 but in 1995 i had an experience
that i called the great awakening
very very difficult experience but after
extensive purification i was propelled
deep into deep time
and i was i dissolved into the human
species
and i experienced the death of humanity
and the rebirth of humanity not as an
individual
but as the species i experienced
that humanity came into a
a global systems crisis a period of
profound
loss and disruption and turmoil
a loss of control a time of profound
destructuring
a time that was so disruptive and
so intimidating that for a time it felt
like
we would all be dead it was an
extinction event
but just when it was at its worst
the pressure lifted the storm passed
and we survived humanity survived
significantly paired down but we
survived
and when we survived and when we began
to pick ourselves up
and put our lives back together
we had been changed we had been changed
deep in our core
that in the depths of this global crisis
we had
found certain principles certain values
certain truths
and lived in them and these
this experience changed us in a never to
be reversed fashion
many ways to describe this process but
at its core
i think it's basically
a true encounter with the truth of our
oneness
and a an outbreak of oneness
in human species and in human culture
that experience that
in which that mystics have talked about
you know for thousands of years the
experience that we are
fundamentally at core one with each
other
and one with life and when you have that
experience
then you just can't hurt people you you
don't allow yourself
you would never allow yourself your
actions to hurt people and we began to
build
a culture to build a civilization
out of this experience of oneness and
truly an experience of of
humanity of us of a world civilization
that did not leave anybody out it was
completely inclusive
a world civilization that worked for all
that this was a pivot point in our
spiritual development
from this and period on and i don't know
i was never shown
exactly how or exactly when except that
it seemed to be
a global systems crisis that was
triggered by a global ecological crisis
now i gotta say this was taking place in
the 90s and i was not reading the global
literature there was
i wasn't reading the global ecological
literature
you know now we're beginning to sort of
see you know
exactly what you're talking about coming
in but this was 20 years ago
25 years ago um
in my last sessions in my in the last
couple of sessions i was given one more
deep deep the deepest encounter
with deep time taken deep into
humanity's
evolutionary future and was given the
experience
of the deepest experience i had had
of the humanity that we are becoming i
think we are entering
a time in history of deep deep turmoil
but we are not being punished for our
sins
we are we are not being destroyed though
it will feel like it in certain ways
but we're giving birth and certainly
all women know birth is excruciatingly
hard work
gestation is long birth is short and
intense
we are giving birth and we're giving
birth to the next
form of humanity to the next iteration
of human life i think we're giving birth
to
a species that is truly an enlightened
species and i mean that in a technical
sense
a species a humanity of christ
a humanity of buddhas the humanities of
the prophet
a deeply awakened spiritually awakened
humanity
and that's a before and after turning
point and in this last session when i
was taken deep into the future
and allowed to experience this future
human it is
so beautiful it is such a magnificent
creature
that we are creating in history i mean a
just an extraordinarily open heart of
pure compassion
and an open mind in deep communion with
the intelligence of the universe
just i think it's really important for
us to have a deep vision of what
what we are doing in the long term
otherwise we would be we
might drown in the sorrow that's coming
labor is hard but this is we must look
beyond labor to understand that what we
are doing is creating
we're bringing into existence a future
being a future human
wow well we unfortunately myself
included or as a collective we always
grow from suffering unfortunately we
have the
the greatest growth you also mentioned
the peered down human is that
uh there'll be less souls
incarnated in a physical form that you
saw
well i draw that not primarily from my
experiences though it's resonates with
my experience but
i draw that really from looking at the
ecological literature today
people who are just plotting the hard
numbers the demographics
what is the carrying capacity of the
planet they talk about the
old earth and new earth you know the old
earth is pre-damaged of industrial
civilization
new earth is post damage of industrial
where they estimate that the carrying
capacity could be two billion people
and we're coming into you know seven
eight nine
billion people there's the push is going
to come to shove
and you know many many people who are
not
have never taken any psychedelics you
know are really looking at a time of
deep deep planetary disruption where we
won't be able to
feed our population given the depth
of ecological uh turbulence
and the droughts and the the
deforestation
and so on and so forth so i mean just
intellectually i think we have ample
evidence that we are
we are coming into a time of great
challenges and some of those challenges
will take lives
the key essential question is
how soon will we wake up how soon will
we begin to make
important choices to living in harmony
with the planet
living in harmony with with each other
the sooner we start making those choices
the more the the more we can reduce the
damage
that will be done we have already locked
into place
a depth of disruption in this pl on this
planet that's just
deeply shaking we've already locked it
in place
but we can still pull ourselves out of
this dive
or we can just blunder deeper into this
dive
i know you didn't necessarily see time
frames but you talk about the sorrow was
there a
trajectory of time for this this
sorrowful period in
our species history i think the 21st
century
is is the beginning of what i would call
the dark night of our collective soul
now the dark knight is a technical term
that scholars of mysticism use
and and it refers to a time of a very
very intense purification
that comes and precedes mystical
awakening mystical illumination
the dark night of our collective time is
a time of intense purification
of letting go of the past of a purifying
of the past
before we can move into a truly new
future
and i think that the 21st century is
such a time
i don't think it's going to be done
quickly i think it'll take several
generations we're lucky talking about a
huge
change here i don't know how long it
will take
but clearly things are accelerating i
mean there's so many things are
accelerating technologically socially
intellectually the internet the fact
that i'm talking with you tonight across
vast spaces amazing broadcasters to
people i mean this
unprecedented right things are speeding
up how
fast it takes how long it takes partly
depends upon
how we handle the pressures that are
coming that are already being placed
upon us
i mean we just the trump presidency was
four years of denial of the reality of
climate change
we lost a lot of time during those four
years
we could have been doing better than we
are now
how soon we'll begin to make serious
commitments
to living in balance with the planet i
think we're
we're coming into it and we i think we
have actually already entered into
the early stages of these convulsions i
think
covet 19 is kind of like a um
a what is the term
in a in a symphony it's like the
overture
of a symphony it's not itself the depth
of the disruption that's coming
but it's like the overture that signals
some of the themes
that are coming and we all know how
deeply disrupted our lives have been
with kovid well i think it's going to
get much much worse
than what we've experienced with covet
but perhaps
from kovid we are beginning to learn
some of the insights and behaviors that
will help us do better
when the next series of crises come
that takes me just briefly onto fear
because i just feel there's so much in
the collective consciousness there's so
much fear what are your thoughts on fear
and how to move through
a fear-based state
well first we have reasons to be afraid
i mean you know we've
we've not doing a very good job with the
number of things
and there is a tally coming so from a
completely realistic perspective we have
causes to fear i fear for my children
i fear from my grandchildren but
my deeper deeper experiences at the
wisdom that the universe is profoundly
wise
the universe is extraordinarily
intelligent
and the universe is deeply compassionate
but to experience to to really see to be
able to see
the the compassion of the universe
you have to look very very deep because
on the surface
the universe looks like a mean son of a
[__] and on the surface the universe
doesn't look very intelligent or
profoundly wise so
you know you really have to be willing
to look deep
ramakrishna said if you want to know god
you must be willing to look evil in the
face
you must understand that evil is not
something outside of the divine but it
is actually part of the
the way that the divine manifests itself
not in malice
but that the consequent acts with great
power
in ways that hurt us at times
and that it feels like evil but it
actually it's much deeper than that my
experience
in the sessions is that i was many many
times drawn into and dissolved into
realities so deep so large
i didn't have words to describe it i
mean some people would describe it as
the divine
i tend to talk about it as the cosmic
mind or the mind of the universe
and i experienced a universe
extraordinarily wise
extraordinarily intelligent just massive
orders of intelligence beyond
anything i had imagined previously and
that's the intelligence that lies behind
our moment in history
we are being summoned we are being
called into a higher order of existence
we have to let go of the past but the
even though the circumstances of this
transformation are demanding
they're extraordinarily important and
extremely exciting
i mean look when we die we don't want to
simply have had a comfortable life
we want to have had a life that means
something that really has
challenged us and brought something deep
out of us
and i think our time in history is that
kind of time it's not going to be
comfortable
but it can be very very purposeful and
very meaningful and it can be an
extraordinary
adventure and that i think
uh that engagement of intelligence
is much more powerful to me than fear
fear does not does not move me
very deeply and like one of the things
that fell away from me over the course
of this journey is
fear of death i have no fear of death
and and i don't say i say that truly
humbly i mean it's just
i'm not afraid of it because i've
experienced where i'm going when i die
i'm ex i've experienced where people go
when they die
and anyone any shaman or any deep
spiritual practitioner has likely had
these kinds of experiences
and so i know that i am entering into a
greater intelligence i know i'm entering
into a profound love
and therefore i have no fear and if you
have no fear of death
then it tends to sort of sap the
strength of all these other lesser fears
that nibble at us around the edges
they don't frighten me
so many people i i get asked this
question all the time
what happens when we die or i'm so
afraid of death
it's very comforting from your
experiences to say that there is no fear
of death
i think there's we're at a time when we
we have learned
so much about what happens when we die i
mean i
i taught a course called transpersonal
studies in in
my undergraduate courses and in it we
looked at reincarnation research
you know just a large burgeoning body of
literature that clearly demonstrates
that death is not the end of existence
our consciousness continues
near-death episode research hundreds
thousands and thousands of people who
have had glimpses
of what's waiting for them when they die
and extraordinary consistent
experiences we have people uh like
michael newton's work his book's journey
of the
journeys of the soul and the destiny of
souls where he
regressed people not only into their
previous
lives but into their life in between
their lives he actually was able to
regress people into conditions where
they remembered
their afterlife experiences and after
taking hundreds of people there he was
able to reconstruct
a picture of what happens to us when we
die and what do you know
it's extraordinarily consistent with the
tibetan book of the dead and some of the
the great insights that come out of our
spiritual traditions
so that we're beginning to piece
together and in psychedelic experiences
you know any shamanic tradition will
tell you
you know you can die before you die
i mean the saying is those who die
before they die do not die when they die
it's you can die before you die
physically you can experience that
reality
before i mean and because
the reason we survive the destruction of
the body is not because something that
happens to us at the moment of death
it's because of something that we
already are right here right now
we already have the spiritual reality
alive within us we already have
access to the spiritual reality and when
you tune
into that reality deeply you everybody
experiences the same fundamental thing
it's impossible to die
the form that you work and die you know
the outer layers can die but the inner
essence doesn't die
and you take all your memory with you
you take
all of your learning with you and we
don't have to accept this on faith
anymore
we have many many opportunities for this
to be a true
genuine intellectually persuasive study
field of study
and this is a this is a large topic but
i have to ask this question in your
experiences
this constant cycle of life and death
and rebirth and
coming back into the physical body what
is the purpose of it all and is there an
endpoint
ah well big questions aren't they
i know i'm so sorry to do this to you
i'm not it's okay
fair game uh
well i don't there isn't an end point
that we can recognize
any more than we can say what the end
point of the universe is
because billions and billions and
billions of years ahead of us you know
we're just
and reincarnation is the same thing what
reincarnation does
is lift from us the burden of too little
time
what it tells us that we have an
open-ended amount of time
in which we will be growing and evolving
the classic portrait of reincarnation
that emerged
about 4 000 years ago is that you
reincarnate reincarnate you learn you
become more spiritually developed until
you awaken to your divine nature
once you awaken to your divine nature
then you leave
and then you achieve like you know
moksha you escape and you don't have to
be here anymore
but that leaves unanswered the question
what is the purpose of physical
existence in the first place is it
simply to get out of here
and the more we know about how big the
universe is and how old it is
and how intelligent it is the more that
model
of reality just doesn't seem to be very
persuasive
in my experience in the sessions a very
different understanding of reincarnation
emerged
i had an experience in one particular
session which was
crescendo of lots of sessions of work
where i began to have an experience
where all of my former lives started
coming in
and now now i'm familiar with some of my
former lives i did three years of
hypnotherapy work in which i did some of
this
work but in this case all of my former
life started coming in and it was like
wrapping filaments of of light around a
kite spool
and eventually when they came together
they fused and when they fused there was
an explosion of light of
diamond light out of my chest it just
exploded
and it catapulted me into a state of
awareness
in which i was both an individual but i
was an individual beyond any frame of
reference i had ever experienced before
and i think what i was being shown
was what the trajectory of re where the
trajectory of reincarnation is taking us
it's not simply about the small
incremental improvements that we make in
our lives
lifetime by lifetime though we do it's
not simply about
learning more and learning more level by
level though we do
eventually sooner or later the soul
which is the consciousness that
integrates all of our life experiences
all of our lives come together and they
fuse
and when they fuse there is created
a higher order of human being
what i call the birth of the diamond
soul i think that
when the birth when the diamond soul
awakens
a human inside a human being in earth
the identity shifts we no longer take
our
personal ego our personal private life
as our identity we now know ourselves to
be
100 000 year old beings we know
ourselves to be
a soul we are a soul incarnate we wake
up at that level with our memories
intact
this is not the end of creation it's not
the end of the process but it's a
significant turning point
now imagine if this is happening if this
is built into the fabric
of existence and it's happening not just
to us individually
but to all of us together so that
eventually the entire species goes
through a process
where they wake up the diamond soul
awakens inside of themselves and they
know themselves to be
soul beings incarnate inside time and
space
what a change that would make in the
history of this planet
and i think something like that is what
we are in the process of doing in the
birth the future human
i think the future human is the diamond
soul
we are in a process of becoming fully
self-aware
spiritual beings inside existence
and when we are that that spiritually
awake
truly we are living heaven on earth
nirvana is samsara and we don't need to
go off planet in order to be
in spiritual joy we can experience
spiritual joy
right here right now that's what i think
is happening
reincarnation is maturing us
toward this through this but then
it keeps going another million years
another million years
it's just going to keep going
wow very interesting our lives are just
like a pinprick and
that seems so long it's just one moment
in time really
each life and yet so significant and
particularly i think at this particular
time in history
many people have incarnated caring
in a sense the karmic imprint of many
lives
it's kind of like when you're in college
and you get to the end of your senior
year
you start loading up your courses to
finish your things up quickly
i think a lot of us are loading up our
former lives
in this life so that we carry a lot of
karma
that comes from deep history because we
have a lot of work
that we want to do we want to accomplish
so
this pinprick is actually a pretty a
pretty rich
pin prick in time in time in history
that's a great way to put it and also
removing all the karmic but people call
it debt or the karma that we've
accumulated
i like the idea of that we are i think
we're
i think we're expunging karma
exponentially
but remember we're not simply healing
the past
we're not simply making up for things
that we did wrong
most people rise to the karmic
challenges of their life
most people it's like most of the kids
in school they pass
it's not a perfect system but they pass
they learn
most souls i think pass the karmic
challenges of their life
so in every incarnation they're not
simply making up for things they did
wrong
they're building on things that they did
right
and so we are we're growing
by leaps and bounds on the basis of
things that we have learned and
accumulated positively
sure we have some cleaning up to do you
know a little but
most of what we're doing i think is
we're learning how to write symphonies
we're learning how to to love bigger
deeper
longer we're learning how to think
rich more richly than we have before we
really are building on
a very positive legacy in our past
wow such profound incredible insights
i have to ask you the question why did
you stop your lsd
sessions uh
i stopped uh for two reasons but the
most
important reason is i stopped because it
became too difficult to come back
at this time in the last five years of
my work
i entered a period of communion with
what i call the diamond luminosity
in buddhism they call it dharmakaya the
clear light of absolute reality i
basically
was repeatedly dissolved over four years
into a a level of consciousness that was
so pure
so sublime so
clear clear clear dissolved into the
crystalline body of the divine
drawn into deeper ever deepening
intimacy
with the divine fabric of existence
as you can imagine this was absolutely
deeply soul-satisfying encounters it
changed me forever
but these are temporary states you know
there are some beings god bless them who
can enter into those states and hold
them forever
you know and the great spiritual masters
all honor to them
but when you work with psychedelics you
only get
temporary access to this intimacy
and then you have to come back and
integrate it and digest it
but basically i i was taken over the
years so
deep into the divine so many times
that it it just became too much of a
heartache
to come back into time-space existence
and i knew that i had to stop this work
and i had to spend the rest of my life
digesting
the blessings that i had already been
given and to draw them more deeply into
my heart and mind i couldn't keep going
back
into it and so i made a deal with the
universe
and the deal was that that she would not
draw me this deeply back into her again
until i could stay with her forever
and that was marked the end of my
journey
so i've spent the rest of my life
continuing to reflect on these things to
ponder them
to understand them because i'm a you
know a philosopher
i want to understand things and i want
to share them
and and i hope the story can be useful
to people some people who do
who are themselves psychedelic
journeyers and so maybe there's some
lessons that
can be helpful to them but i hope that
most people who read the book
will not be psychedelic journeyers but
the journey can still be helpful to them
because it will show them something that
will resonate with their own deepest
intuitions
it'll show them a cosmology there's a
picture of our universe
and if it's true i think it's
true it will resonate with that
understanding that we carry
deep in our hearts and in our souls and
therefore it will support them
as they go about their own life
following their own destiny
into their own spiritual fruition
that's my hope well i just have to say
chris professor bash i think you i love
you i think you're amazing
um what profound i mean i've read your
book but speaking with you it's just
incredible
on a final note is there any question
that i've missed and there's something
you'd like to talk to the passion
harvest audience about
i i would advise people not to do what i
did
i i chose to work with very high doses
of lsd
i pushed my system very hard it was more
taxing than i thought it was going to be
in the beginning
and along the way i realized that
there's no reason to push yourself this
hard
so what i would advise today for those
who do want to work with psychedelics in
a spiritual manner to work with lower
doses to work with gentler psychedelics
and to not push themselves as hard and i
lay this all out in the book the reasons
for this and whatnot
so my advice would be maybe learn from
my mistakes
as well as from my successes and don't
do what i did because if you push as
hard as i
did it really does come to
it takes all of your energy and all of
your life
to navigate the journey that you've done
it's like you know if you climb a
mountain
it it takes up years and years of your
life
this took years and years of my life and
i wouldn't have traded it for anything
in the world but
i know that there's certain costs that
come with that and i would encourage
people
not to choose that particular route
other than that
i guess i would offer i would just leave
with a
uh a witness to the profound wisdom
that isn't by embedded in our bodies and
in our hearts and our minds
a wisdom that's embedded in the very
deep
evolving structure of the universe
and the the stars that mesmerizes us
with the pictures from the hubble of the
galaxies and the
and the supernovas and the in the nebula
that the way those the feelings that
those pictures
stir in us and awaken on us those
feelings are true
uh and our lives do participate
intimately deeply in that wisdom
right here right now every day we are
embedded in that wisdom
that's my story and i'm sticking to it
okay you're amazing
professor bash thank you so much for
being on passion harvest i've just
loved talking to you and i'm so honored
to speak with you and what a
wonderful powerful message you're
sharing with the world so thank you so
much
thank you louisa it's been a wonderful
conversation with you thank you for
having me
bye for now bye-bye if you like this
episode
please do subscribe for weekly
passionate
inspirational interviews